## Natural history

__*Migration and Movements*__

A suite of physiological adaptations allow adult leatherback sea turtles the most extensive range of any extant reptile (71EN to 47ES; Pritchard and Trebbau 1984) (see Species Description). In the western Atlantic, adults routinely migrate between boreal, temperate and tropical waters, presumably to optimize both foraging and nesting opportunities (Bleakney 1965; Lazell 1980; Eckert and Eckert 1988). Similarly, the seasonal presence of adult females at major eastern and western Pacific rookeries suggests that migration between nesting and non-nesting areas may also be characteristic of Pacific stocks. The timing and routing of reproductive migrations are unknown; however, eastern Pacific migratory corridors most likely exist along the western seaboards of the United States and Mexico and, in the western Pacific, along the eastern seaboards of the former Soviet Union and Asia, as well as the eastern seaboard of Australia. Bustard (1972) reports "an important migration route ... down the east coast of Australia judging by personal sightings and reports of capture in shark nets." Sightings along the coast of California peak in August, perhaps a reflection of adults moving southward for winter breeding in Mexico.

Post-nesting transoceanic travel (South America to Africa, minimum 5,900 km) is documented by Pritchard (1973). The extent to which leatherbacks undertake transpacific migrations is not known. Morreale et al. (1994) used satellite telemetry to monitor the movements of six post-nesting leatherbacks in the Caribbean Sea and in the Pacific Ocean and reported that nesting cohorts appear to share identical post-nesting migrational pathways.  Similarly, recent studies suggest that females departing nesting beaches in Michoacán, Mexico, follow specific oceanic corridors into pelagic habitats (S. Eckert, HSWRI and L. Sarti M., UNAM, unpubl. data). The movements of males have not been studied.

__*Foraging Biology and Diet*__

Food habits are known primarily from the stomach samples of slaughtered animals and consist largely of cnidarians (medusae, siphonophores) and tunicates (salps, pyrosomas) found in temperate and boreal latitudes (Bleakney 1965; Brongersma 1969; Hartog and Nierop 1984; Davenport and Balazs 1991). Surface jellyfish feeding is reported in waters under U.S.  jurisdiction, especially off the western coast of the continental United States (e.g., Eisenberg and Frazier 1983). Foraging may also occur at depth. Based on offshore studies of diving by adult females nesting on St. Croix, Eckert et al. (1989) proposed that the observed internesting dive behavior reflected nocturnal feeding within the deep scattering layer (strata comprised primarily of vertically migrating zooplankton, chiefly siphonophore and salp colonies in the Caribbean; Michel and Foyo 1976). Hartog (1980) speculated that foraging may occur at depth after finding nematocysts from deep water siphonophores in leatherback stomach samples.

No systematic study of foraging grounds has been initiated. There are clearly areas under U.S. jurisdiction that are predictably frequented by leatherback turtles (such as Monterey Bay, California), but specifically delineated resident feeding areas have not been identified. It has been suggested that roughly one-half the global population of adult females nests on the west coast of Mexico (Pritchard 1982a); if so, the waters off the west coast of the United States may represent some of the most important foraging habitat in the entire world for the leatherback turtle. It is certainly unfortunate that our present knowledge of foraging geography is based solely on infrequent and often isolated reports of foraging animals (see Foraging Biology and Diet). Nothing is known of the relative importance of various foraging habitats or the distribution (or size) of "foraging populations" of any age class.

__*Growth*__

No data on the growth rate of juvenile leatherback turtles in the wild are available. The distribution of juveniles is unknown, and thus specimens are not available for capture-recapture methodologies designed to measure growth. Research is further complicated by poor survivability in captivity. With few exceptions, notably Bels et al. (1988), captive individuals have not survived beyond two years. Captive growth data (e.g., Deraniyagala 1936b; Witham 1977) are widely disparate, but very rapid growth reported by some investigators, coupled with evidence of chondro-osseous development conducive to rapid growth, has led to speculations that leatherbacks may reach sexual maturity in two to three years (Rhodin 1985). Bels et al. (1988) challenge this hypothesis in their report of a healthy captive leatherback 1,200 days [3.28 yr] of age weighing only 28.5 kg, with a carapace 82 cm in length. While leatherbacks may well grow to sexual maturity at an earlier age than other sea turtles, it is clear that additional data, and especially studies of wild specimens, are needed before growth rates can be estimated and age at maturity can be predicted.

